Hi everyone, thanks for having me.
It’s a real pleasure to be a part of this workshop.
4-p
I titled my talk "Whatever can be done will be done".
And I hope it becomes apparent in the end why I did so.
slide-2
I’m Christoph Guttandin. I have a company
called Media Codings. And I do freelance work
for various other companies
and I guess the two most interesting
in the context of this workshop
are Source Elements and InVideo.
14-p
I’m usually named chrisguttandin
anywhere on the internet.
So in case you want to chat with me
please feel free to reach out.
Just send me a message on the platform of your choice.
slide-3
When I was asked to prepare a talk for this workshop
I thought it’s a great opportunity
to present our wishes to the world.
So I asked my co-workers to help me preparing a list
with the things that we would like to implement
at some point or which we implemented already
but would really like to implement in a better way
if possible.
slide-4
The first item on our list is using custom codecs with WebRTC.
slide-5
Doing this has been possible for a while
at least to a certain extent.
You can do it by encoding the audio data
and video data yourself.
And then you would ignore the media functionality
of WebRTC and send the data over a DataChannel.
But the whole process is very cumbersome and
at least for video it’s not very accurate as well.
Every video frame needs to be drawn to a canvas
and then it needs to be grabbed from there
to hand it over to WebAssembly.
It’s very likely that you miss a few frames
when doing this with a live feed.
slide-6
Luckily this is not necessary anymore
since we can now use WebCodecs to do this
in a much more efficient way.
49-p
But WebCodecs are only available in Chromium browsers
so far. Firefox is working on it. But unfortunately
it’s unclear to me what Apple is thinking about it.
slide-7
The next item in our list is partial decoding.
55-p
And with that we mean the ability to only decode
a certain range or maybe only
one specific frame of a media asset.
slide-8
There is a very hacky way to do this for audio
which works by using the decodeAudioData() method.
This method is available on an AudioContext.
Unfortunately it automatically re-samples the audio
to the sampleRate of the AudioContext.
That means the file needs to be parsed manually
to know the correct sampleRate
before doing the actual decoding.
And decodeAudioData() only works with full files
which is another reason why the file
needs to be parsed before the decoding.
We need to find out where it can be sliced.
This is not that easy to figure out
but it’s possible for most file types.
And when done correctly and you’re lucky
decodeAudioData() will happily decode a part of a file
because it believes that it’s decoding the full file.
77-p
Sadly though decodeAudioData() is really broken
in the newest version of Safari.
Apparently the bug is already fixed in the codebase.
But no one knows when that fix will be available
for Safari users.
83-p
To decode a single video frame one could load the video
with a media element and then use seekToNextFrame()
to get the frames one by one.
87-p
But sadly this only works in Firefox.
slide-9
But again all of this is not necessary anymore
now that we have WebCodecs support in Chromium
and soon in Firefox.
slide-10
Another thing which is crucial for us is
to offload as much as we can to other threads.
In the end the main thread should just be there
for triggering the work but not for doing it.
slide-11
There are a number of APIs which
follow this pattern already.
One of them is the AudioWorklet
and the Web Audio API in general.
103-p
For video content there is the OffscreenCanvas
which can be used from within a Web Worker.
106-p
And last but not least it’s possible to insert
a TransformStream into a MediaStream
and transfer that to a Web Worker as well.
110-p
But as you can see browser support for anything
but the Web Audio API is not that great.
Chromium supports all of those APIs.
Firefox has an OffscreenCanvas implementation
behind a flag but didn’t say anything about
transferable streams so far.
And as usual I don’t even dare to guess when
this will be available in Webkit or Safari.
slide-12
Another thing which is often tricky for us
is to keep media in sync.
122-p
Especially if there is some audio or video
processing involved which will delay one or the other
making sure audio and video appear to be sync again
when played back becomes very tricky.
slide-13
There are two properties on an AudioContext
which allow us to know when a sound scheduled
on that AudioContext can actually be heard by the user.
And this allows us to make sure the video frame
displayed at that time matches the audio.
133-p
But sadly these properties only fully work
in Firefox so far. I guess I don’t have to
mention anymore for which browser I don’t know
when they will be available or if
they become available at all.
slide-14
Another hot topic for us is the possibility
to select a certain output device instead of
using the default one.
slide-15
There is a method one can call to change
the output device of a media element
but it only works in Chromium browsers so far.
It’s called setSinkId().
148-p
And as far as I know Firefox is currently implementing
the selectAudioOutput() method which is a new way to
give consent to access audio output devices.
And this is basically what blocks them from
enabling setSinkId().
154-p
Chromium browsers expose the audio output devices already.
Therefore implementing selectAudioOutput() is not
really necessary to use setSinkId().
158-p
But as usual I don’t have an idea what Apple is up to.
slide-16
So when looking at the wishlist again
it looks like it became a todo list.
All those things can be done now and existing hacks
can be replaced with solid implementations,
either today or in the near future.
166-p
At least if we ignore Safari for now.
168-p
Anyway, I came up with some more wishes
which aren’t really spec related anymore
and are more geared towards the implementers.
slide-17
The first item on that list is that I wish for
releases to be as boring as possible.
175-p
I think Chromium browsers and Firefox do have
a pretty good process to ensure that already.
slide-18
Both browsers publish a nightly build.
Right now this is version 97 for Chromium
and 95 for Firefox. But the exact numbers
don’t really matter here.
183-p
Every 4 weeks the state of the nightly version
gets promoted to the next stage.
slide-19
Whatever has been the nightly version at that time
becomes the beta version.
Likewise the nightly version will increase as well.
So it’s clear that whatever is in the nightly versions
of those browsers today will be in beta
in at least 4 weeks.
slide-20
Another 4 weeks later the beta version
becomes the stable version and the nightly version
- whatever that will be at that time -
becomes the new beta version.
198-p
It’s like a steady stream of updates.
And by the time a feature reaches the beta channel
you can calculate the date at which it becomes available
to all regular users.
203-p
The whole process is very predictable
and yes it is super boring.
206-p
I usually test my code against the nightly versions
to check regressions coming down the pipe and
to make sure there will be no surprises (at least for me)
when a new version of Chromium or Firefox gets published.
slide-21
Sadly things are a bit different with Safari.
There is a Technology Preview of Safari
which is currently at version 133.
It contains a lot of experimental and unfinished
implementations of upcoming features.
217-p
But it is unknown which of those features end up
in the next stable release of Safari.
They treat it as a secret.
The Technology Preview and the stable Safari have
completely unrelated version numbers.
I guess the stable version is a subset of
the Technology Preview but I can’t say that for sure.
225-p
There is no way for developers to test their apps
with what becomes the next stable version of Safari.
Testing it is only possible after it got already
released to all the users.
230-p
This is of course challenging when you try to build
a reliable web app that user’s can trust on
to work as expected.
234-p
Another problem is that the stable version of Safari
gets only updated every 6 months.
Which means the minimum lifetime of regressions
is usually 6 months.
And since regressions can’t get caught before
they get released, regressions are really not
unheard of in Safari.
242-p
As I said there is currently one which breaks
decodeAudioData() and another one which breaks
audio streams in WebRTC.
slide-22
This leads me to my next wish.
248-p
I would love regressions to get fixed as soon as possible.
250-p
Imagine building a web app that media professionals
rely on to get their work done on every single day.
And suddenly a browser update causes that app to fail.
254-p
I know that even Safari can get security updates
in a very timely manner.
And I would love that to happen for patches
to fix regressions, too.
slide-23
I know some powerful features have the potential
to get abused by malicious pages.
And I definitely agree that certain features
should not be enabled by default for each and every page.
264-p
However I think the users of a browser
should have the option to allow certain sites
to access the file system,
to record the whole screen,
to capture the system audio,
to receive MIDI messages,
to run high priority threads
and so on and so on.
273-p
I think this doesn’t need to be an explicit
permission prompt in every case.
It could also be a little toast-style message
that pops up to notify the users about the usage
of a certain API or something totally different.
279-p
The point is I think the users should be empowered
to decide themselves which features they want to enable
and which ones they better don’t want to use right now.
slide-24
Similarly as a developer I would really love to
have the same power. As I said before I like to run
automated tests against the current
and the upcoming version of each browser.
288-p
I do this locally and I also do this in the cloud
with services like BrowserStack and Sauce Labs.
291-p
It’s a real challenge to test media APIs
because they usually require user interaction to work.
But there is obviously no user
when running automated tests.
296-p
There are flags that one can set for Chromium browsers
and Firefox. But they are not really very well documented
and they always lag behind the capabilities of
the browser and sadly they have the tendency to break
from time to time.
302-p
And at least as far as I know it’s not even possible
to disable the autoplay policy in Safari
when starting the browser programmatically.
That means things are more difficult to test in Safari.
Which in turn means bugs get less caught.
And this is of course a real problem since
as I said before a typical bug stays in Safari
for at least 6 months.
But only if it gets caught in the first place.
slide-25
Another thing which is of course totally different
but I think is a bit problematic as well is that
building web apps seems to be so easy at first glance.
Last week I saw a full WebCodecs example which fit
on a single slide.
That was very impressive and it showed that
one could build something really powerful in no time.
320-p
And yes, that’s absolutely true.
I did for example quickly hack together a little app
to record this talk in the browser.
(I didn’t use it in the end but that’s a different story.)
But building a real web app which is meant to be used
by people in a professional context day in and day out
is a completely different story.
Doing that requires a lot of effort.
329-p
I think many people underestimate the amount of work
that needs to be done to build a full product on the web.
332-p
I honestly think building professional apps
is challenging in any environment
and I wouldn’t expect to be easy on the web.
slide-26
But after all I think it’s mostly a
chicken and egg problem.
Once a few well known and well established web apps
exist that have a wide adoption among media professionals
others will become interested in bringing there apps
to the web as well.
343-p
Source Elements does for example have a plugin for DAWs.
It’s currently a native application since the DAWs
that it’s meant to be used with are
native applicationsas well.
And this could only ever change if those DAWs
become web apps at some point.
350-p
There is definitely still a long way to go
but I think the shift has already begun.
slide-27
In conclusion I would like to repeat
the title of this talk again:
"A fundamental rule in technology says
whatever can be done will be done.".
358-p
I think building professional media applications
for the web is something that can be done today.
And I know many people working on it.
I hope and believe it’s only a matter of time
until that becomes the new normal.
slide-28
Thanks again to the people I work with
for helping me to prepare this talk
and many thanks to all of you for watching it.
See you at the workshop. Bye.